<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 22: The Catastrophe</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Catastrophe</span>
			</h2>
			<p>Such are the facts that, with an almost incredible talent for investigation, had been collected and prepared by the stout man with the jovial face who had taken Prosper under his protection, <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret.</p>
			<p>Reaching Paris at nine o’clock in the evening, not by the Lyons road as he had said, but by the Orleans train, <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret hurried up to the Archangel, where he found the cashier impatiently expecting him.</p>
			<p>“You are about to hear some rich developments,” he said to Prosper, “and see how far back into the past one has to seek for the primary cause of a crime. All things are linked together and dependent upon each other in this world of ours. If Gaston de Clameran had not entered a little café at Tarascon to play a game of billiards twenty years ago, your money-safe would not have been robbed three weeks ago.</p>
			<p>“Valentine de la Verberie is punished in 1866 for the murder committed for her sake in 1840. Nothing is neglected or forgotten, when stern Retribution asserts her sway. Listen.”</p>
			<p>And he forthwith related all that he had discovered, referring, as he went along, to a voluminous manuscript which he had prepared, with many notes and authenticated proofs attached.</p>
			<p>During the last week <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret had not had twenty-four hours’ rest, but he bore no traces of fatigue. His iron muscles braved any amount of labor, and his elastic nature was too well tempered to give way beneath such pressure.</p>
			<p>While any other man would have sunk exhausted in a chair, he stood up and described, with the enthusiasm and captivating animation peculiar to him, the minutest details and intricacies of the plot that he had devoted his whole energy to unravelling; personating every character he brought upon the scene to take part in the strange drama, so that his listener was bewildered and dazzled by his brilliant acting.</p>
			<p>As Prosper listened to this narrative of events happening twenty years back, the secret conversations as minutely related as if overheard the moment they took place, it sounded more like a romance than a statement of plain facts.</p>
			<p>All these ingenious explanations might be logical, but what foundation did they possess? Might they not be the dreams of an excited imagination?</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret did not finish his report until four o’clock in the morning; then he cried, with an accent of triumph:</p>
			<p>“And now they are on their guard, and sharp, wary rascals too: but they won’t escape me; I have cornered them beautifully. Before a week is over, Prosper, you will be publicly exonerated, and will come out of this scrape with flying colors. I have promised your father you shall.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” said Prosper in a dazed way, “it cannot be!”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“All this you have just told me.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret opened wide his eyes, as if he could not understand anyone having the audacity to doubt the accuracy of <em>his</em> report.</p>
			<p>“Impossible, indeed!” he cried. “What! have you not sense enough to see the plain truth written all over every fact, and attested by the best authority? Your thick-headedness exasperates me to the last degree.”</p>
			<p>“But how can such rascalities take place in Paris, in our very midst, without⁠⸺”</p>
			<p>“Parbleu!” interrupted the fat man, “you are young, my friend! Are you innocent enough to suppose that crimes, forty times worse than this, don’t occur every day? You think the horrors of the police-court are the only ones. Pooh! You only read in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Gazette des Tribunaux</i> of the cruel melodramas of life, where the actors are as cowardly as the knife, and as treacherous as the poison they use. It is at the family fireside, often under shelter of the law itself, that the real tragedies of life are acted; in modern crimes the traitors wear gloves, and cloak themselves with public position; the victims die, smiling to the last, without revealing the torture they have endured to the end. Why, what I have just related to you is an everyday occurrence; and you profess astonishment.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t help wondering how you discovered all this tissue of crime.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that is the point!” said the fat man with a self-satisfied smile. “When I undertake a task, I devote my whole attention to it. Now, make a note of this: When a man of ordinary intelligence concentrates his thoughts and energies upon the attainment of an object, he is certain to obtain ultimate success. Besides that, I have my own method of working up a case.”</p>
			<p>“Still I don’t see what grounds you had to go upon.”</p>
			<p>“To be sure, one needs some light to guide one in a dark affair like this. But the fire in Clameran’s eye at the mention of Gaston’s name ignited my lantern. From that moment I walked straight to the solution of the mystery, as I would walk to a beacon-light on a dark night.”</p>
			<p>The eager, questioning look of Prosper showed that he would like to know the secret of his protector’s wonderful penetration, and at the same time be more thoroughly convinced that what he had heard was all true⁠—that his innocence would be more clearly proved.</p>
			<p>“Now confess,” cried <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, “you would give anything in the world to find out how I discovered the truth?”</p>
			<p>“I certainly would, for it is the darkest of mysteries, marvellous!”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret enjoyed Prosper’s bewilderment. To be sure, he was neither a good judge nor a distinguished amateur; but he was an astonished admirer, and sincere admiration is always flattering, no matter whence it comes.</p>
			<p>“Well,” he replied, “I will explain my system. There is nothing marvellous about it as you will soon see. We worked together to find the solution of the problem, so you know my reasons for suspecting Clameran as the prime mover in the robbery. As soon as I had acquired this certainty, my task was easy. You want to know what I did? I placed trustworthy people to watch the parties in whom I was most interested. Joseph Dubois took charge of Clameran, and Nina Gypsy never lost sight of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel and her niece.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot comprehend how Nina ever consented to this service.”</p>
			<p>“That is my secret,” replied <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret. “Having the assistance of good eyes and quick ears on the spot, I went to Beaucaire to inquire into the past, so as to link it with what I knew of the present. The next day I was at Clameran; and the first step I took was to find the son of <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean, the old valet. An honest man he was, too; open and simple as nature herself; and he made a good bargain in selling me his madder.”</p>
			<p>“Madder?” said Prosper with a puzzled look; “what did you⁠⸺”</p>
			<p>“Of course I wanted to buy his madder. Of course I did not appear to him as I do to you now. I was a countryman wanting to buy madder; he had madder for sale; so we began to bargain about the price. The debate lasted almost all day, during which time we drank a dozen bottles of wine. About suppertime, <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean was as drunk as a bunghole, and I had purchased nine hundred francs’ worth of madder which your father will sell tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>Prosper’s astonished countenance made <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret laugh heartily.</p>
			<p>“I risked nine hundred francs,” he continued, “but thread by thread I gathered the whole history of the Clamerans, Gaston’s love-affair, his flight, and the stumbling of the horse ridden by Louis. I found also that about a year ago Louis returned, sold the château to a man named Fougeroux, whose wife, Mihonne, had a secret interview with Louis the day of the purchase. I went to see Mihonne. Poor woman! her rascally husband has pounded all the sense out of her; she is almost idiotic. I told her I came from the Clameran family, and she at once related to me everything she knew.”</p>
			<p>The apparent simplicity of this mode of investigation confounded Prosper. He wondered it had not occurred to him before.</p>
			<p>“From that time,” continued <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, “the skein began to disentangle; I held the principal thread. I now set about finding out what had become of Gaston. Lafourcade, who is a friend of your father, informed me that he had bought a foundery, and settled in Oloron, where he soon after suddenly died. Thirty-six hours later I was at Oloron.”</p>
			<p>“You are certainly indefatigable!” said Prosper.</p>
			<p>“No, but I always strike while the iron is hot. At Oloron I met Manuel, who had gone there to make a little visit before returning to Spain. From him I obtained a complete history of Gaston’s life, and all the particulars of his death. Manuel also told me of Louis’s visit; and the innkeeper described a young workman who was there at the same time, whom I at once recognized as Raoul.”</p>
			<p>“But how did you know of all the conversations between the villains?” said Prosper. “You seem to be aware of their secret thoughts.”</p>
			<p>“You evidently think I have been drawing upon my imagination. You will soon see to the contrary,” said Verduret good-humoredly. “While I was at work down there, my aids did not sit with their hands tied together. Mutually distrustful, Clameran and Raoul preserved all the letters received from each other. Joseph Dubois copied them, or the important portions of them, and forwarded them to me. Nina spent her time listening at all doors under her supervision, and sent me a faithful report. Finally, I have at the Fauvels another means of investigation which I will reveal to you later.”</p>
			<p>“I understand it all now,” murmured Prosper.</p>
			<p>“And what have you been doing during my absence, my young friend?” asked <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret; “have you heard any news?”</p>
			<p>At this question Prosper turned crimson. But he knew that it would never do to keep silent about his imprudent step.</p>
			<p>“Alas!” he stammered, “I read in a newspaper that Clameran was about to marry Madeleine; and I acted like a fool.”</p>
			<p>“What did you do?” inquired Verduret anxiously.</p>
			<p>“I wrote an anonymous letter to <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel, informing him that his wife was in love with Raoul⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret here brought his clinched fist down upon the little table near by, with such violence that the thin plank was shivered. His cheerful face in an instant clouded over.</p>
			<p>“What folly!” he exclaimed, “how could you go and ruin everything?”</p>
			<p>He arose from his seat, and strode up and down the room, oblivious of the lodgers below, whose windows shook with every angry stamp of his foot.</p>
			<p>“What made you act so like a child, an idiot, a fool?” he said indignantly to Prosper.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur!”</p>
			<p>“Here you are, drowning; an honest man springs into the water to save you, and just as he approaches the shore you entangle his feet to prevent him from swimming! What was my last order to you when I left here?”</p>
			<p>“To keep quiet, and not go out of the hotel.”</p>
			<p>“Well.”</p>
			<p>The consciousness of having done a foolish thing made Prosper appear like a frightened schoolboy, accused by his teacher of playing truant.</p>
			<p>“It was night, monsieur,” he hesitatingly said, “and, having a violent headache, I took a walk along the quay thinking there was no risk in my entering a café; there I picked up a paper, and read the dreadful announcement.”</p>
			<p>“Did you not promise to trust everything to me?”</p>
			<p>“You were absent, monsieur; and you yourself might have been surprised by an unexpected⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Only fools are ever surprised into committing a piece of folly,” cried <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret impatiently. “To write an anonymous letter! Do you know to what you expose me? Breaking a sacred promise made to one of the few persons whom I highly esteem among my fellow-beings. I shall be looked upon as a liar, a cheat⁠—I who⁠—”</p>
			<p>He abruptly stopped, as if afraid to trust himself to speak further; after calming down a little, he turned to Prosper, and said:</p>
			<p>“The best thing we can do is to try and repair the harm you have done. When and where did you post this idiotic letter?”</p>
			<p>“Yesterday evening, at the Rue du Cardinal Lemoine. It hardly reached the bottom of the box before I regretted having written it.”</p>
			<p>“You had better have regretted it before dropping it in. What time was it?”</p>
			<p>“About ten o’clock.”</p>
			<p>“Then your sweet little letter must have reached <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel with his early mail; probably he was alone in his study when he read it.”</p>
			<p>“I know he was: he never goes down to the bank until he has opened his letters.”</p>
			<p>“Can you recall the exact terms of your letter? Stop and think, for it is very important that I should know.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is unnecessary for me to reflect. I remember the letter as if I had just written it.”</p>
			<p>And almost verbatim he repeated what he had written.</p>
			<p>After attentively listening, <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret sat with a perplexed frown upon his face, as if trying to discover some means of repairing the harm done.</p>
			<p>“That is an awkward letter,” he finally said, “to come from a person who does not deal in such things. It leaves everything to be understood without specifying anything; it is vague, jeering, insidious. Repeat it to me.”</p>
			<p>Prosper obeyed, and his second version did not vary from the first in a single word.</p>
			<p>“Nothing could be more alarming than that allusion to the cashier,” said the fat man, repeating the words after Prosper. “The question, ‘Was it also he who stole <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel’s diamonds?’ is simply fearful. What could be more exasperating than the sarcastic advice, ‘In your place, I would not have any public scandal, but would watch my wife?’ The effect of your letter must have been terrible,” he added thoughtfully as he stood with folded arms looking at poor Prosper. “M. Fauvel is quick-tempered, is he not?”</p>
			<p>“He has a violent temper, when aroused.”</p>
			<p>“Then the mischief is not irreparable.”</p>
			<p>“What! do you suppose⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I think that an impulsive man is afraid of himself, and seldom carries out his first angry intentions. That is our chance of salvation. If, upon the receipt of your bombshell, <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel, unable to restrain himself, rushed into his wife’s room, and cried, ‘Where are your diamonds?’ <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel will confess all; and then goodbye to our hopes.”</p>
			<p>“Why would this be disastrous?”</p>
			<p>“Because, the moment <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel opens her lips to her husband, our birds will take flight.”</p>
			<p>Prosper had never thought of this eventuality.</p>
			<p>“Then, again,” continued <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, “it would deeply distress another person.”</p>
			<p>“Anyone whom I know?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my friend, and very well too. I should certainly be chagrined to the last degree, if these two rascals escape, without having obtained complete satisfaction from them.”</p>
			<p>“It seems to me that you know how to take care of yourself, and can do anything you please.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret shrugged his shoulders, and said:</p>
			<p>“Did you not perceive the gaps in my narrative?”</p>
			<p>“I did not.”</p>
			<p>“That is because you don’t know how to listen. In the first place, did Louis de Clameran poison his brother, or not?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; I am sure of it, from what you tell me.”</p>
			<p>“There you are! You are much more certain, young man, than I am. Your opinion is mine; but what proof have we? None. I skilfully questioned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> C⁠⸺. He has not the shadow of suspicion; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> C⁠⸺ is no quack; he is a cultivated, observing man of high standing. What poisons produce the effects described? I know of none; and yet I have studied up on poisons from Pomerania digitalis to Sauvresy aconite.”</p>
			<p>“The death took place so opportunely⁠⸺”</p>
			<p>“That anybody would be convinced of foul play. That is true; but chance is sometimes a wonderful accomplice in crime. In the second place, I know nothing of Raoul’s antecedents.”</p>
			<p>“Is information on that point necessary?”</p>
			<p>“Indispensable, my friend; but we will soon know something. I have sent off one of my men⁠—excuse me, I mean one of my friends⁠—who is very expert and adroit, <abbr>M.</abbr> Palot; and he writes that he is on the track. I am interested in the history of this sentimental, sceptical young rascal. I have an idea that he must have been a brave, honest sort of youth before Clameran ruined him.”</p>
			<p>Prosper was no longer listening.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret’s words had inspired him with confidence. Already he saw the guilty men arraigned before the bar of justice; and enjoyed, in anticipation, this assize-court drama, where he would be publicly exonerated and restored to position.</p>
			<p>Then he would seek Madeleine; for now he understood her strange conduct at the dressmaker’s, and knew that she had never ceased to love him.</p>
			<p>This certainty of future happiness restored all the self-possession that had deserted him the day he found the safe robbed. For the first time he was astonished at the peculiarity of his situation.</p>
			<p>Prosper had at first only been surprised at the protection of <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret and the extent of his investigations: now he asked himself, what could have been his motives for acting thus?</p>
			<p>What price did he expect for this sacrifice of time and labor?</p>
			<p>His anxiety made him say nervously:</p>
			<p>“It is unjust to us both, monsieur, for you to preserve your incognito any longer. When you have saved the honor and life of a man, you should at least let him know whom he is to thank for it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” said <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret smilingly, “you are not out of the woods yet. You are not married either: so you must wait a little longer; patience and faith.”</p>
			<p>The clock struck six.</p>
			<p>“Good heavens!” exclaimed <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret. “Can it be six o’clock? I did hope to have a good night’s rest, but I must keep on moving. This is no time to be asleep.”</p>
			<p>He went into the passage, and, leaning over the balusters, called, “<abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre! I say, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre!”</p>
			<p>The hostess of the Archangel, the portly wife of Fanferlot the Squirrel, evidently had not been to bed. This fact struck Prosper.</p>
			<p>She appeared, obsequious, smiling, and eager to please.</p>
			<p>“What can I do for you, gentlemen?” she inquired.</p>
			<p>“You can send your⁠—Joseph Dubois and Palmyre to me as soon as possible. Let me know when they arrive. I will rest a few minutes, and you can awake me when they come.”</p>
			<p>As soon as <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre left the room, the fat man unceremoniously threw himself on the bed.</p>
			<p>“You have no objections, I suppose?” he said to Prosper.</p>
			<p>In five minutes he was fast asleep; and Prosper sat by the bed watching him with a perplexed gaze, wondering who this strange man could be.</p>
			<p>About nine o’clock someone tapped timidly at the door.</p>
			<p>Slight as the noise was, it aroused <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, who sprang up, and called out:</p>
			<p>“Who is it?”</p>
			<p>Prosper arose and opened the door.</p>
			<p>Joseph Dubois, the valet of the Marquis of Clameran, entered.</p>
			<p>This important assistant of <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret was breathless from fast running; and his little rat eyes were more restless than ever.</p>
			<p>“Well, patron, I am glad to see you once more,” he cried. “Now you can tell me what to do; I have been perfectly lost during your absence, and have felt like a jumping monkey with a broken string.</p>
			<p>“What! did you get frightened too?”</p>
			<p>“Bless me! I think I had cause for alarm when I could not find you anywhere. Yesterday afternoon I sent you three despatches, to the addresses you gave me, Lyons, Beaucaire, and Oloron, but received no answer. I was almost crazy with anxiety when your message reached me just now.”</p>
			<p>“Things are getting hot, then.”</p>
			<p>“Hot! They are burning! The place is too warm to hold me any longer; upon my soul, I can’t stand it!”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret occupied himself in repairing his toilet, become disarranged by lying down.</p>
			<p>When he had finished, he threw himself in an easy-chair, and said to Joseph Dubois, who remained respectfully standing, cap in hand, like a soldier awaiting orders:</p>
			<p>“Explain yourself, my boy, and quickly, if you please; no circumlocution.”</p>
			<p>“It is just this, patron. I don’t know what your plans are, or what line you are taking now; but I can just tell you this: that you will have to wind up the affair pretty quickly.”</p>
			<p>“That is your opinion, Master Joseph?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, patron, because if you wait any longer, goodbye to our covey: you will certainly find an empty cage, and the birds flown. You smile? Yes, I know you are clever, and can accomplish anything; but they are cunning blades, and as slippery as eels. They know that they are watched, too.”</p>
			<p>“The devil they do!” cried <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret. “Who has been committing blunders?”</p>
			<p>“Oh! nobody has done anything wrong,” replied Joseph. “You know, patron, that they suspected something long ago. They gave you a proof of it, the night of the fancy ball; that ugly cut on your arm was the beginning. Ever since, they have had one eye open all the time. They had begun to feel easier, when all of a sudden, yesterday, <i xml:lang="FR">ma foi</i>, they began to smell a rat!”</p>
			<p>“Was that the cause of your telegrams?”</p>
			<p>“Of course. Now listen: yesterday morning when my master got up, about ten o’clock, he took it into his head to arrange the papers in his desk; which, by the way, has a disgusting lock which has given me a deal of trouble. Meanwhile, I pretended to be fixing the fire, so as to remain in the room to watch him. Patron, the man has an eye like a Yankee! At the first glance he saw, or rather divined, that his papers had been meddled with, he turned livid, and swore an oath; Lord, what an oath!”</p>
			<p>“Never mind the oath; go on.”</p>
			<p>“Well, how he discovered the little attentions I had devoted to his letters, I can’t imagine. You know how careful I am. I had put everything in perfect order; just as I found things I left them, when, lo and behold! my noble marquis picks up each paper, one at a time, turns it over, and smells it. I was just thinking I would offer him a magnifying-glass, when all of a sudden he sprang up, and with one kick sent his chair across the room, and flew at me with his eyes flashing like two pistols. ‘Somebody has been at my papers,’ he shrieked; ‘this letter has been photographed!’ B-r-r-r! I am not a coward, but I can tell you that my heart stood perfectly still; I saw myself as dead as Caesar, cut into mincemeat; and says I to myself, ‘Fanfer⁠—excuse me⁠—Dubois, my friend, you are lost, dead;’ and I thought of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret was buried in thought, and paid no attention to the worthy Joseph’s analysis of his personal sensations.</p>
			<p>“What happened next?” said Verduret after a few minutes.</p>
			<p>“Why, he was just as frightened as I was, patron. The rascal did not even dare to touch me. To be sure, I had taken the precaution to get out of his reach; we talked with a large table between us. While wondering what could have enabled him to discover the secret, I defended myself with virtuous indignation. I said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘It cannot be; <abbr>M.</abbr> le marquis is mistaken. Who would dare touch his papers?’</p>
			<p>“Bast! Instead of listening to me, he flourished an open letter, and said:</p>
			<p>“ ‘This letter has been photographed! here is proof of it!’ and he pointed to a little yellow spot on the paper, shrieking out, ‘Look! Smell! Smell it, you devil! It is⁠—’ I forget the name he called it, but some acid used by photographers.”</p>
			<p>“I know, I know,” said <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret; “go on; what next?”</p>
			<p>“Then, patron, we had a scene; what a scene! He ended by seizing me by the throat, and shaking me like a plum-tree, saying he would shake me until I told him who I was, what I knew, and where I came from. As if I knew, myself! I was obliged to account for every minute of my time since I had been in his service. The devil was worse than a judge of instruction, in his questions. Then he sent for the hotel porter, who had charge of the front door, and questioned him closely, but in English, so that I could not understand. After a while, he cooled down, and when the boy was gone, presented me with twenty francs, saying, ‘I am sorry I was so sharp with you; you are too stupid to have been guilty of the offence.’ ”</p>
			<p>“He said that, did he?”</p>
			<p>“He used those very words to my face, patron.”</p>
			<p>“And you think he meant what he said?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly I do.”</p>
			<p>The fat man smiled, and whistled a little tune expressive of contempt.</p>
			<p>“If you think that,” he said, “Clameran was right in his estimate of your brilliancy.”</p>
			<p>It was easy to see that Joseph Dubois was anxious to hear his patron’s grounds for considering him stupid, but dared not ask.</p>
			<p>“I suppose I am stupid, if you think so,” said poor Fanferlot humbly. “Well, after he had done blustering about the letters, <abbr>M.</abbr> le marquis dressed, and went out. He did not want his carriage, but I saw him hire a cab at the hotel door. I thought he had perhaps disappeared forever; but I was mistaken. About five o’clock he returned as gay as a bullfinch. During his absence, I had telegraphed to you.”</p>
			<p>“What! did you not follow him?”</p>
			<p>“I stayed on the spot in case of his return; but one of our friends kept watch on him, and this friend gave me a report of my dandy’s movements. First he went to a broker’s, then to the bank and discount office: so he must be collecting his money to take a little trip.”</p>
			<p>“Is that all he did?”</p>
			<p>“That is all, patron. But I must tell you how the rascals tried to shut up, ‘administratively,’ you understand, <abbr>Mlle.</abbr> Palmyre. Fortunately you had anticipated something of the kind, and given orders to watch over her safety. But for you, she would now be in prison.”</p>
			<p>Joseph looked up to the ceiling by way of trying to remember something more. Finding nothing there, he said:</p>
			<p>“That is all. I rather think <abbr>M.</abbr> Patrigent will rub his hands with delight when I carry him my report. He did not expect to see me any more, and has no idea of the facts I have collected to swell the size of his File 113.”</p>
			<p>There was a long silence. Joseph was right in supposing that the crisis had come. <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret was arranging his plan of battle while waiting for the report of Nina⁠—now Palmyre, upon which depended his point of attack.</p>
			<p>But Joseph Dubois began to grow restless and uneasy.</p>
			<p>“What must I do now, patron?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Return to the hotel; probably your master had noticed your absence; but he will say nothing about it, so continue⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret was interrupted by an exclamation from Prosper, who was standing near a window.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“There is Clameran!” cried Prosper, “over there.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret and Joseph ran to the window.</p>
			<p>“Where is he?” said Joseph, “I don’t see him.”</p>
			<p>“There, at the corner of the bridge, behind that orange-woman’s stall.”</p>
			<p>Prosper was right. It was the noble Marquis of Clameran, who, hid behind the stall, was watching for his servant to come out of the Archangel.</p>
			<p>At first the quick-sighted Verduret had some doubts whether it was the marquis, who, being skilled in these hazardous expeditions, managed to conceal himself behind a pillar so as to elude detection.</p>
			<p>But a moment came, when, elbowed by the pressing crowd, he was obliged to come out on the pavement in full view of the window.</p>
			<p>“Now don’t you see I was right!” cried the cashier.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said the amazed Joseph, “I am amazed!”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret seemed not in the least surprised, but quietly said:</p>
			<p>“The game needs hunting. Well, Joseph, my boy, do you still think that your noble master was duped by your acting injured innocence?”</p>
			<p>“You assured me to the contrary, patron,” said Joseph in an humble tone; “and your opinion is more convincing than all the proofs in the world.”</p>
			<p>“This pretended outburst of rage was premeditated on the part of your noble master. Knowing that he is being tracked, he naturally wishes to discover who his adversaries are. You can imagine how uncomfortable he must be at this uncertainty. Perhaps he thinks his pursuers are some of his old accomplices, who, being starved, want a piece of his cake. He will remain there until you come out: then he will come in to find out who you are.”</p>
			<p>“But, patron, I can go home without his seeing me.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know. You will climb the little wall separating the Archangel from the wine-merchant’s yard, and keep along the stationer’s area, until you reach the Rue de la Huchette.”</p>
			<p>Poor Joseph looked as if he had just received a bucket of ice-water upon his head.</p>
			<p>“Exactly the way I was going, patron,” he gasped out. “I heard that you knew every plank and door of all the houses in Paris, and it certainly must be so.”</p>
			<p>The fat man made no reply to Joseph’s admiring remarks. He was thinking how he could catch Clameran.</p>
			<p>As to the cashier, he listened wonderingly, watching these strangers, who seemed determined to reinstate him in public opinion, and punish his enemies, while he himself stood by powerless and bewildered. What their motives for befriending him could be, he vainly tried to discover.</p>
			<p>“I will tell you what I can do,” said Joseph after deep thought.</p>
			<p>“What is it?”</p>
			<p>“I can innocently walk out of the front door, and loaf along the street until I reach the Hotel du Louvre.”</p>
			<p>“And then?”</p>
			<p>“Dame! Clameran will come in and question <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre, whom you can instruct beforehand; and she is smart enough to put any sharper off the track.”</p>
			<p>“Bad plan!” pronounced <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret decidedly; “a scamp so compromised as Clameran is not easily put off the track; now his eyes are opened, he will be pretty hard to catch.”</p>
			<p>Suddenly, in a brief tone of authority which admitted of no contradiction, the fat man said:</p>
			<p>“I have a way. Has Clameran, since he found that his papers had been searched, seen Lagors?”</p>
			<p>“No, patron.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he has written to him?”</p>
			<p>“I’ll bet you my head he has not. Having your orders to watch his correspondence, I invented a little system which informs me every time he touches a pen; during the last twenty-four hours the pens have not been touched.”</p>
			<p>“Clameran went out yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“But the man who followed him says he wrote nothing on the way.”</p>
			<p>“Then we have time yet!” cried Verduret. “Hurry! Hurry! I give you fifteen minutes to make yourself a head; you know the sort; I will watch the rascal until you come up.”</p>
			<p>The delighted Joseph disappeared in a twinkling; while Prosper and <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret remained at the window observing Clameran, who, according to the movements of the crowd, was sometimes lost to sight, and sometimes just in front of the window, but was evidently determined not to quit his post until he had obtained the information he sought.</p>
			<p>“Why do you devote yourself exclusively to the marquis?” asked Prosper.</p>
			<p>“Because, my friend,” replied <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, “because⁠—that is my business, and not yours.”</p>
			<p>Joseph Dubois had been granted a quarter of an hour in which to metamorphose himself; before ten minutes had elapsed he reappeared.</p>
			<p>The dandified coachman with Bergami whiskers, red vest, and foppish manners, was replaced by a sinister-looking individual, whose very appearance was enough to scare any rogue.</p>
			<p>His black cravat twisted around a paper collar, and ornamented by an imitation diamond pin; his long-tailed black boots and heavy cane, revealed the employee of the Rue de Jerusalem, as plainly as the shoulder-straps mark a soldier.</p>
			<p>Joseph Dubois had vanished forever; and from his livery, phoenix-like and triumphant, arose the radiant Fanferlot, surnamed the Squirrel.</p>
			<p>When Fanferlot entered the room, Prosper uttered a cry of surprise and almost fright.</p>
			<p>He recognized the man who had assisted the commissary of police to examine the bank on the day of the robbery.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret examined his aide with a satisfied look, and said:</p>
			<p>“Not bad! There is enough of the police-court air about you to alarm even an honest man. You understood me perfectly this time.”</p>
			<p>Fanferlot was transported with delight at this compliment.</p>
			<p>“What must I do now, patron?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“Nothing difficult for an adroit man: but remember, upon the precision of our movements depends the success of my plan. Before arresting Lagors, I wish to dispose of Clameran. Now that the rascals are separated, the first thing to do is to prevent their coming together.”</p>
			<p>“I understand,” said Fanferlot, snapping his little ratlike eyes; “I am to create a diversion.”</p>
			<p>“Exactly. Go out by the Rue de la Huchette, and hasten to <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel’s bridge; loaf along the bank, and finally sit on the steps of the quay, so that Clameran may know he is being watched. If he doesn’t see you, do something to attract his attention.”</p>
			<p>“Parbleu! I will throw a stone into the water,” said Fanferlot, rubbing his hands with delight at his own brilliant idea.</p>
			<p>“As soon as Clameran has seen you,” continued <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, “he will be alarmed, and instantly decamp. Knowing there are reasons why the police should be after him, he will hasten to escape you; then comes the time for you to keep wide awake; he is a slippery eel, and cunning as a rat.”</p>
			<p>“I know all that; I was not born yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“So much the better. You can convince him of that. Well, knowing you are at his heels, he will not dare to return to the Hotel du Louvre, for fear of being called on by troublesome visitors. Now, it is very important that he should not return to the hotel.”</p>
			<p>“But suppose he does?” said Fanferlot.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret thought for a minute, and then said:</p>
			<p>“It is not probable that he will do so; but if he should, you must wait until he comes out again, and continue to follow him. But he won’t enter the hotel; very likely he will take the cars: but in that event don’t lose sight of him, no matter if you have to follow him to Siberia. Have you money with you?”</p>
			<p>“I will get some from <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre.”</p>
			<p>“Very good. Ah! one more word. If the rascal takes the cars, send me word. If he beats about the bush until night, be on your guard, especially in lonely places; the desperado is capable of any enormity.”</p>
			<p>“If necessary, must I fire?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be rash; but, if he attacks you, of course defend yourself. Come, ’tis time you were gone.”</p>
			<p>Dubois-Fanferlot went out. Verduret and Prosper resumed their post of observation.</p>
			<p>“Why all this secrecy?” inquired Prosper. “Clameran is charged with ten times worse crimes than I was ever accused of, and yet my disgrace was made as public as possible.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you understand,” replied the fat man, “that I wish to separate the cause of Raoul from that of the marquis? But, sh! look!”</p>
			<p>Clameran had left his place near the orange-woman’s stand, and approached the bridge, where he seemed to be trying to make out some unexpected object.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret; “he has just discovered our man.”</p>
			<p>Clameran’s uneasiness was quite apparent; he walked forward a few steps, as if intending to cross the bridge; then, suddenly turning around, rapidly walked in the direction of the Rue <abbr>St.</abbr> Jacques.</p>
			<p>“He is caught!” cried <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret with delight.</p>
			<p>At that moment the door opened, and <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Nina Gypsy, alias Palmyre Chocareille, entered.</p>
			<p>Poor Nina! Each day spent in the service of Madeleine seemed to have aged her a year.</p>
			<p>Tears had dimmed the brilliancy of her beautiful black eyes; her rosy cheeks were pale and hollow, and her merry smile was quite gone.</p>
			<p>Poor Gypsy, once so gay and spirited, now crushed beneath the burden of her sorrows, was the picture of misery.</p>
			<p>Prosper thought that, wild with joy at seeing him, and proud of having so nobly devoted herself to his interest, Nina would throw her arms around his neck, and say how much she loved him. To his surprise, Nina scarcely spoke to him. Although his every thought had been devoted to Madeleine since he discovered the reasons for her cruelty, he was hurt by Nina’s cold manner.</p>
			<p>The girl stood looking at <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret with a mixture of fear and devotion, like a poor dog that has been cruelly treated by its master.</p>
			<p>He, however, was kind and gentle in his manner toward her.</p>
			<p>“Well, my dear,” he said encouragingly, “what news do you bring me?”</p>
			<p>“Something is going on at the house, monsieur, and I have been trying to get here to tell you; at last, <abbr>Mlle.</abbr> Madeleine made an excuse for sending me out.”</p>
			<p>“You must thank <abbr>Mlle.</abbr> Madeleine for her confidence in me. I suppose she carried out the plan we decided upon?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, monsieur.”</p>
			<p>“She receives the Marquis of Clameran’s visits?”</p>
			<p>“Since the marriage has been decided upon, he comes every day, and mademoiselle receives him with kindness. He seems to be delighted.”</p>
			<p>These answers filled Prosper with anger and alarm. The poor young man, not comprehending the intricate moves of <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret, felt as if he were being tossed about from pillar to post, and made the tool and laughingstock of everybody.</p>
			<p>“What!” he cried; “this worthless Marquis of Clameran, an assassin and a thief, allowed to visit at <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel’s, and pay his addresses to Madeleine? Where are the promises, monsieur, which you have made? Have you merely been amusing yourself by raising my hopes, to dash them⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Enough!” interrupted <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret harshly; “you are too green to understand anything, my friend. If you are incapable of helping yourself, at least have sense enough to refrain from importuning those who are working for you. Do you not think you have already done sufficient mischief?”</p>
			<p>Having administered this rebuke, he turned to Gypsy, and said in softer tones:</p>
			<p>“Go on, my child: what have you discovered?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing positive, monsieur; but enough to make me nervous, and fearful of impending danger. I am not certain, but suspect from appearances, that some dreadful catastrophe is about to happen. It may only be a presentiment. I cannot get any information from <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel; she refuses to answer any hints, and moves about like a ghost, never opening her lips. She seems to be afraid of her niece, and to be trying to conceal something from her.”</p>
			<p>“What about <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel?”</p>
			<p>“I was just about to tell you, monsieur. Some fearful misfortune has happened to him, you may depend upon it. He wanders about as if he had lost his mind. Something certainly occurred yesterday; his voice even is changed. He is so harsh and irritable that mademoiselle and <abbr>M.</abbr> Lucien were wondering what could be the matter with him. He seems to be on the eve of giving way to a burst of anger; and there is a wild, strange look about his eyes, especially when he looks at madame. Yesterday evening, when <abbr>M.</abbr> de Clameran was announced, he jumped up, and hurried out of the room, saying that he had some work to do in his study.”</p>
			<p>A triumphant exclamation from <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret interrupted <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Gypsy. He was radiant.</p>
			<p>“Hein!” he said to Prosper, forgetting his bad humor of a few minutes before; “Hein! What did I tell you?”</p>
			<p>“He has evidently⁠⸺”</p>
			<p>“Been afraid to give way to his first impulse; of course he has. He is now seeking for proofs of your assertions. He must have them by this time. Did the ladies go out yesterday?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, a part of the day.”</p>
			<p>“What became of <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel?”</p>
			<p>“The ladies took me with them; we left <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel at home.”</p>
			<p>“Not a doubt of it!” cried the fat man; “he looked for proofs, and found them, too! Your letter told him exactly where to go. Ah, Prosper, that unfortunate letter gives more trouble than everything else together.”</p>
			<p>These words seemed to throw a sudden light on <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Gypsy’s mind.</p>
			<p>“I understand it now!” she exclaimed. “M. Fauvel knows everything.”</p>
			<p>“That is, he thinks he knows everything; and what he has been led to fear, and thinks he has discovered, is worse than the true state of affairs.”</p>
			<p>“That accounts for the order which <abbr>M.</abbr> Cavaillon overheard him give to his servant-man, Evariste.”</p>
			<p>“What order?”</p>
			<p>“He told Evariste to bring every letter that came to the house, no matter to whom addressed, into his study, and hand them to him; saying that, if this order was disobeyed, he should be instantly discharged.”</p>
			<p>“At what time was this order given?” asked <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret.</p>
			<p>“Yesterday afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“That is what I was afraid of,” cried <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret. “He has clearly made up his mind what course to pursue, and is keeping quiet so as to make his vengeance more sure. The question is, Have we still time to counteract his projects? Have we time to convince him that the anonymous letter was incorrect in some of its assertions?”</p>
			<p>He tried to hit upon some plan for repairing the damage done by Prosper’s foolish letter.</p>
			<p>“Thank you for your information, my dear child,” he said after a long silence. “I will decide at once what steps to take, for it will never do to sit quietly and let things go on in this way. Return home without delay, and be careful of everything you say and do; for <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel suspects you of being in the plot. Send me word of anything that happens, no matter how insignificant it may be.”</p>
			<p>Nina, thus dismissed, did not move, but said timidly:</p>
			<p>“What about Caldas, monsieur?”</p>
			<p>This was the third time during the last fortnight that Prosper had heard this name, Caldas.</p>
			<p>The first time it had been whispered in his ear by a respectable-looking, middle-aged man, who offered his protection one day, when passing through the police-office passage.</p>
			<p>The second time, the judge of instruction had mentioned it in connection with Gypsy’s history.</p>
			<p>Prosper thought over all the men he had ever been connected with, but could recall none named Caldas.</p>
			<p>The impassable <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret started and trembled at the mention of this name, but, quickly recovering himself, said:</p>
			<p>“I promised to find him for you, and I will keep my promise. Now you must go; good morning.”</p>
			<p>It was twelve o’clock, and <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret suddenly remembered that he was hungry. He called <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre, and the beaming hostess of the Archangel soon placed a tempting breakfast before Prosper and his friend.</p>
			<p>But the savory broiled oysters and flaky biscuit failed to smooth the perplexed brow of <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret.</p>
			<p>To the eager questions and complimentary remarks of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Alexandre, he answered:</p>
			<p>“Chut, chut! let me alone; keep quiet.”</p>
			<p>For the first time since he had known the fat man, Prosper saw him betray anxiety and hesitation.</p>
			<p>He remained silent as long as he could, and then uneasily said:</p>
			<p>“I am afraid I have embarrassed you very much, monsieur.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you have dreadfully embarrassed me,” replied <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret. “What on earth to do now, I don’t know! Shall I hasten matters, or keep quiet and wait for the next move? And I am bound by a sacred promise. Come, we had better go and advise with the judge of instruction. He can assist me. Come with me; let us hurry.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
