<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>In the Paris evening papers of Tuesday, February 28, 1866, under the head of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Local Items</i>, the following announcement appeared:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>A daring robbery, committed against one of our most eminent bankers, <abbr>M.</abbr> André Fauvel, caused great excitement this morning throughout the neighborhood of Rue de Provence.</p>
				<p>The thieves, who were as skilful as they were bold, succeeded in making an entrance to the bank, in forcing the lock of a safe that has heretofore been considered impregnable, and in possessing themselves of the enormous sum of three hundred and fifty thousand francs in banknotes.</p>
				<p>The police, immediately informed of the robbery, displayed their accustomed zeal, and their efforts have been crowned with success. Already, it is said, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. B.</abbr>, a clerk in the bank, has been arrested, and there is every reason to hope that his accomplices will be speedily overtaken by the hand of justice.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>For four days this robbery was the town talk of Paris.</p>
			<p>Then public attention was absorbed by later and equally interesting events: an acrobat broke his leg at the circus; an actress made her debut at a small theatre: and the item of the 28th was soon forgotten.</p>
			<p>But for once the newspapers were⁠—perhaps intentionally⁠—wrong, or at least inaccurate in their information.</p>
			<p>The sum of three hundred and fifty thousand francs certainly had been stolen from <abbr>M.</abbr> André Fauvel’s bank, but not in the manner described.</p>
			<p>A clerk had also been arrested on suspicion, but no decisive proof had been found against him. This robbery of unusual importance remained, if not inexplicable, at least unexplained.</p>
			<p>The following are the facts as they were related with scrupulous exactness at the preliminary examination.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
