<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-21" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>
			<p>For more than an hour after Raoul’s departure, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel remained in a state of stupor bordering upon unconsciousness.</p>
			<p>Gradually, however, she recovered her senses sufficiently to comprehend the horrors of her present situation; and, with the faculty of thought, that of suffering returned.</p>
			<p>The dreadful scene in which she had taken part was still before her affrighted vision; all the attending circumstances, unnoticed at the time, now struck her forcibly.</p>
			<p>She saw that she had been the dupe of a shameful conspiracy: that Raoul had tortured her with cold-blooded cruelty, had taken advantage of her tenderness, and had speculated upon her fright.</p>
			<p>But had Prosper anything to do with the robbery? This <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel had no way of finding out. Ah, Raoul knew how the blow would strike when he accused Prosper. He knew that <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel would end by believing in the cashier’s complicity.</p>
			<p>The unhappy woman sat and thought over every possible way in which Raoul could find out the secret word without Prosper’s knowledge. She rejected with horror the idea that the cashier was the instigator of the crime; but, in spite of herself, it constantly recurred. And finally she felt convinced that what Raoul said must be true; for who but Prosper could have betrayed the word? And who but Prosper could have left so large an amount of money in the safe, which, by order of the banker, was to be always left empty at night?</p>
			<p>Knowing that Prosper was leading a life of extravagance and dissipation, she thought it very likely that he had, from sheer desperation, resorted to this bold step to pay his debts; her blind affection, moreover, made her anxious to attribute the crime to anyone, rather than to her darling son.</p>
			<p>She had heard that Prosper was supporting one of those worthless creatures whose extravagance impoverishes men, and whose evil influence perverts their natures. When a young man is thus degraded, will he stop at any sin or crime? Alas! <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel knew, from her own sad experience, to what depths even one fault can lead. Although she believed Prosper guilty, she did not blame him, but considered herself responsible for his sins.</p>
			<p>Had she not herself banished the poor young man from the fireside which he had begun to regard as his own? Had she not destroyed his hopes of happiness, by crushing his pure love for a noble girl, whom he looked upon as his future wife, and thus driven him into a life of dissipation and sin?</p>
			<p>She was undecided whether to confide in Madeleine, or bury the secret in her own breast.</p>
			<p>Fatally inspired, she decided to keep silent.</p>
			<p>When Madeleine returned home at eleven o’clock, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel not only was silent as to what had occurred, but even succeeded in so concealing all traces of her agitation, that she escaped any questions from her niece.</p>
			<p>Her calmness never left her when <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel and Lucien returned, although she was in terror lest her husband should go down to the cash-room to see that everything was safely locked up. It was not his habit to open the money-safe at night, but he sometimes did.</p>
			<p>As fate would have it, the banker, as soon as he entered the room, began to speak of Prosper, saying how distressing it was that so interesting a young man should be thus throwing himself away, and wondering what could have happened to make him suddenly cease his visits at the house, and resort to bad company.</p>
			<p>If <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel had looked at the faces of his wife and niece while he harshly blamed the cashier, he would have been puzzled at their strange expressions.</p>
			<p>All night long <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel suffered the most intolerable agony. She counted each stroke of the town-clock, as the hours dragged on.</p>
			<p>“In six hours,” she said to herself, “in five hours⁠—in four hours⁠—in three hours⁠—in one hour⁠—all will be discovered; and then what will happen? Heaven help me!”</p>
			<p>At sunrise she heard the servants moving about the house. Then the office-shutters opened; then, later, she heard the clerks going into the bank.</p>
			<p>She attempted to get up, but felt so ill and weak that she sank back on her pillow; and lying there, trembling like a leaf, bathed in cold perspiration, she awaited the discovery of the robbery.</p>
			<p>She was leaning over the side of the bed, straining her ear to catch a sound from the cash-room, when Madeleine, who had just left her, rushed into the room.</p>
			<p>The white face and wild eyes of the poor girl told <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel that the crime was discovered.</p>
			<p>“Do you know what has happened, aunt?” cried Madeleine, in a shrill, horrified tone. “Prosper is accused of robbery, and the police have come to take him to prison!”</p>
			<p>A groan was <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel’s only answer.</p>
			<p>“Raoul or the marquis is at the bottom of this,” continued Madeleine excitedly.</p>
			<p>“How can they be concerned in it, my child?”</p>
			<p>“I can’t tell yet; but I only know that Prosper is innocent. I have just seen him, spoken to him. He would never have looked me in the face had he been guilty.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel opened her lips to confess all: fear kept her silent.</p>
			<p>“What can these wretches want?” said Madeleine: “what new sacrifice do they demand? Dishonor Prosper! Good heavens! Why did they not kill him at once? He would rather be dead than disgraced!”</p>
			<p>Here the entrance of <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel interrupted Madeleine. The banker was so angry that he could scarcely speak.</p>
			<p>“The worthless scoundrel!” he cried; “to think of his daring to accuse me! To insinuate that I robbed my own safe! And that Marquis de Clameran must needs doubt my good faith in keeping my engagement to pay his money!”</p>
			<p>Then, without noticing the effect of his story upon the two women, he proceeded to relate all that had occurred downstairs.</p>
			<p>“I was afraid this extravagance would lead to something terrible,” he said in conclusion; “you know I told you last night that Prosper was growing worse in his conduct, and that he would get into trouble.”</p>
			<p>Throughout the day Madeleine’s devotion to her aunt was severely tried.</p>
			<p>The generous girl saw disgrace heaped upon the man she loved. She had perfect faith in his innocence; she felt sure she knew who had laid the trap to ruin him; and yet she could not say a word in his defence.</p>
			<p>Fearing that Madeleine would suspect her of complicity in the theft, if she remained in bed and betrayed so much agitation, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel arose and dressed for breakfast.</p>
			<p>It was a dreary meal. No one tasted a morsel. The servants moved about on their tiptoes, as silently as if a death had occurred in the family.</p>
			<p>About two o’clock, a servant came to <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel’s study, and said that the Marquis de Clameran desired to see him.</p>
			<p>“What!” cried the banker; “does he dare⁠—”</p>
			<p>Then, after a moment’s reflection, he added:</p>
			<p>“Ask him to walk up.”</p>
			<p>The very name of Clameran had sufficed to arouse all the slumbering wrath of <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel. The victim of a robbery, finding his safe empty at the moment that he was called upon to make a heavy payment, he had been constrained to conceal his anger and resentment; but now he determined to have his revenge upon his insolent visitor.</p>
			<p>But the marquis declined to come upstairs. The messenger returned with the answer that the gentleman had a particular reason for seeing <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel in the office below, where the clerks were.</p>
			<p>“What does this fresh impertinence mean?” cried the banker, as he angrily jumped up and hastened downstairs.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> de Clameran was standing in the middle of the room adjoining the cash-room; <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel walked up to him, and said bluntly:</p>
			<p>“What do you want now, monsieur? You have been paid your money, and I have your receipt.”</p>
			<p>To the surprise of all the clerks, and the banker himself, the marquis seemed not in the least offended at this rude greeting, but answered in a deferential but not at all humble manner:</p>
			<p>“You are hard upon me, monsieur; but I deserve it, and that is why I am here. A gentleman always acknowledges when he is in the wrong: in this instance I am the offender; and I flatter myself that my past will permit me to say so without being accused of cowardice or lack of self-respect. I insisted upon seeing you here instead of in your study, because, having been rude to you in the presence of your clerks, I wished them to hear me apologize for my behavior of this morning.”</p>
			<p>Clameran’s speech was so different from his usual overbearing, haughty conduct, that surprise almost stupefied the banker, and he could only answer:</p>
			<p>“I must say that I was hurt by your doubts, insinuations, suspicions of my honor⁠—”</p>
			<p>“This morning,” continued the marquis, “I was irritated, and thoughtlessly gave way to my temper. Although I am gray-headed, my disposition is as excitable as that of a fiery young man of twenty years; and I hope you will forget words uttered in a moment of excitement, and now deeply regretted.”</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel, being a kindhearted though quick-tempered man, could appreciate Clameran’s feelings; and, knowing that his own high reputation for scrupulous honesty could not be affected by any hasty or abusive language uttered by a creditor, at once calmed down before so frank an apology; and, holding out his hand to Clameran, said:</p>
			<p>“Let us forget what happened, monsieur.”</p>
			<p>They conversed in a friendly manner for some minutes; and, after Clameran had explained why he had such pressing need of the money at that particular hour of the morning, turned to leave, saying that he would do himself the honor of calling upon <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel during the day.</p>
			<p>“That is, if a visit from me would not be considered intrusive,” he said with a shade of hesitation. “Perhaps, after the trouble of this morning, she does not wish to be disturbed.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no!” said the banker; “come, by all means; I think a visit from you would cheer her mind. I shall be from home all day, trying to trace this unfortunate affair.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel was in the same room where Raoul had threatened to kill himself the night previous; she looked very pale and ill as she lay on a sofa. Madeleine was bathing her forehead.</p>
			<p>When <abbr>M.</abbr> de Clameran was announced, they both started up as if a phantom had appeared before them.</p>
			<p>Although Louis had been gay and smiling when he parted from <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel downstairs, he now wore a melancholy aspect, as he gravely bowed, and refused to seat himself in the chair which <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel motioned him to take.</p>
			<p>“You will excuse me, ladies, for intruding at this time of your affliction; but I have a duty to fulfil.”</p>
			<p>The two women were silent; they seemed to be waiting for him to explain. He added in an undertone:</p>
			<p>“I know all.”</p>
			<p>By an imploring gesture, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel tried to stop him. She saw that he was about to reveal her secret to Madeleine.</p>
			<p>But Louis would not see this gesture; he turned his whole attention to Madeleine, who haughtily said:</p>
			<p>“Explain yourself, monsieur.”</p>
			<p>“Only one hour ago,” he replied, “I discovered that Raoul last night forced from his mother the key of the money-safe, and stole three hundred and fifty thousand francs.”</p>
			<p>Madeleine crimsoned with shame and indignation; she leaned over the sofa, and seizing her aunt’s wrist shook it violently, and in a hollow voice cried:</p>
			<p>“It is false, is it not, aunt? speak!”</p>
			<p>“Alas! alas!” groaned <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel. “What have I done?”</p>
			<p>“You have allowed Prosper to be accused,” cried Madeleine; “you have suffered him to be arrested, and disgraced for life.”</p>
			<p>“Forgive me,” sighed <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel. “He was about to kill himself; I was so frightened! Then you know⁠—Prosper was to share the money: he gave Raoul the secret word⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Good Heavens! Aunt, how could you believe such a falsehood as that?”</p>
			<p>Clameran interrupted them.</p>
			<p>“Unfortunately, what your aunt says of <abbr>M.</abbr> Bertomy is the truth,” he said in a sad tone.</p>
			<p>“Your proofs, monsieur; where are your proofs?”</p>
			<p>“Raoul’s confession.”</p>
			<p>“Raoul is false.”</p>
			<p>“That is only too true: but how did he find out the word, if <abbr>M.</abbr> Bertomy did not reveal it? And who left the money in the safe but <abbr>M.</abbr> Bertomy?”</p>
			<p>These arguments had no effect upon Madeleine.</p>
			<p>“And now tell me,” she said scornfully, “what became of the money?”</p>
			<p>There was no mistaking the significance of these words: they meant:</p>
			<p>“You are the instigator of the robbery, and of course you have taken possession of the money.”</p>
			<p>This harsh accusation from a girl whom he so passionately loved, when, grasping bandit as he was, he gave up for her sake all the money gained by his crime, so cruelly hurt Clameran that he turned livid. But his mortification and anger did not prevent him from pursuing the part he had prepared and studied.</p>
			<p>“A day will come, mademoiselle,” he said, “when you will deeply regret having treated me so cruelly. I understand your insinuation; you need not attempt to deny it.”</p>
			<p>“I have no idea of denying anything, monsieur.”</p>
			<p>“Madeleine!” remonstrated <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel, who trembled at the rising anger of the man who held her fate in his hands, “Madeleine, be careful!”</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle is pitiless,” said Clameran sadly; “she cruelly punishes an honorable man whose only fault is having obeyed his brother’s dying injunctions. And I am here now, because I believe in the joint responsibility of all the members of a family.”</p>
			<p>Here he slowly drew from his pocket several bundles of banknotes, and laid them on the mantelpiece.</p>
			<p>“Raoul stole three hundred and fifty thousand francs,” he said: “I return the same amount. It is more than half my fortune. Willingly would I give the rest to insure this being the last crime committed by him.”</p>
			<p>Too inexperienced to penetrate this bold, and yet simple plan of Clameran’s, Madeleine was dumb with astonishment; all her calculations were upset.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel, on the contrary, accepted this restitution as salvation sent from heaven.</p>
			<p>“Oh, thanks, monsieur, thanks!” she cried, gratefully clasping Clameran’s hand in hers; “you are goodness itself!”</p>
			<p>Louis’s eye lit up with pleasure. But he rejoiced too soon. A minute’s reflection brought back all of Madeleine’s distrust. She thought this magnanimity and generosity unnatural in a man whom she considered incapable of a noble sentiment, and at once concluded that it must conceal some snare beneath.</p>
			<p>“What are we to do with the money?” she demanded.</p>
			<p>“Restore it to <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>“We restore it, monsieur, and how? Restoring the money is denouncing Raoul, and ruining my aunt. Take back your money, monsieur. We will not touch it.”</p>
			<p>Clameran was too shrewd to insist; he took up the money, and prepared to leave.</p>
			<p>“I comprehend your refusal, mademoiselle, and must find another way of accomplishing my wish. But, before retiring, let me say that your injustice pains me deeply. After the promise you made to me, I had reason to hope for a kinder welcome.”</p>
			<p>“I will keep my promise, monsieur; but not until you have furnished security.”</p>
			<p>“Security! And for what? Pray, explain yourself.”</p>
			<p>“Something to protect my aunt against the molestations of Raoul after my⁠—marriage. What is to prevent his coming to extort money from his mother after he has squandered my dowry? A man who spends a hundred thousand francs in four months will soon run through my little fortune. We are making a bargain; I give you my hand in exchange for the honor and life of my aunt; and of course you must give me some guarantee to secure the performance of your promise.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! I will give you ample securities,” cried Clameran, “such as will quiet all your suspicious doubts of my good faith. Alas! you will not believe in my devotion; what shall I do to convince you of its sincerity? Shall I try to save <abbr>M.</abbr> Bertomy?”</p>
			<p>“Thanks for the offer, monsieur,” replied Madeleine disdainfully; “if Prosper is guilty, let him be punished by the law; if he is innocent, God will protect him.”</p>
			<p>Here Madeleine stood up, to signify that the interview was over.</p>
			<p>Clameran bowed, and left the room.</p>
			<p>“What pride! What determination! The idea of her demanding securities of me!” he said to himself as he slowly walked away. “But the proud girl shall be humbled yet. She is so beautiful! and, if I did not so madly love her, I would kill her on the spot!”</p>
			<p>Never had Clameran been so irritated.</p>
			<p>Madeleine’s quiet determination and forethought had unexpectedly thrown him off his well-laid track; not anticipating any such self assertion on her part, he was disconcerted, and at a loss how to proceed.</p>
			<p>He knew that it would be useless to attempt deceiving a girl of Madeleine’s character a second time; he saw that she had penetrated his motives sufficiently to put her on the defensive, and prepare her for any new surprise. Moreover, she would prevent <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel from being frightened and forced into submission any longer.</p>
			<p>With mortification and rage, Louis saw that after all his plotting, when success was in his reach, when his hopes were almost crowned, he had been foiled and scornfully set at defiance by a girl: the whole thing would have to be gone over again.</p>
			<p>Although Madeleine had resigned herself to sacrifice, it was still evident that she had no idea of doing so blindly, and would not hazard her aunt’s and her own happiness upon the uncertainty of a verbal promise.</p>
			<p>Clameran racked his brain to furnish guarantees; how could he convince her that Raoul had no idea or desire of annoying <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel in the future?</p>
			<p>He could not tell Madeleine that her dowry was to be the bribe received by Raoul for his future good behavior and past crimes.</p>
			<p>The knowledge of all the circumstances of this shameful criminal intrigue would have reassured her upon her aunt’s peace of mind; but then it would never do to inform her of these details, certainly not before the marriage.</p>
			<p>What securities could he give? Not one could he think of.</p>
			<p>But Clameran was not one of those slow-minded men who take weeks to consider a difficulty. When he could not untie a knot, he would cut it.</p>
			<p>Raoul was a stumbling-block to his wishes, and he swore to rid himself of his troublesome accomplice as soon as possible.</p>
			<p>Although it was not an easy matter to dispose of so cunning a knave, Clameran felt no hesitation in undertaking to accomplish his purpose. He was incited by one of those passions which age renders terrible.</p>
			<p>The more certain he was of Madeleine’s contempt and dislike, the more determined he was to marry her. His love seemed to be a sort of insane desire to possess and call his own the one being whom he recognized as his superior in every way.</p>
			<p>But he had sense enough to see that he might ruin his prospects by undue haste, and that the safest course would be to await the result of the robbery and its effect upon Prosper.</p>
			<p>He waited in anxious expectation of a summons from <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel. At last he concluded that Madeleine was waiting for him to make the next move in the direction of yielding.</p>
			<p>He was right; Madeleine knew that after the last bold step the accomplices would remain quiet for a while; she knew resistance could have no worse results than would cowardly submission; and therefore assumed the entire responsibility of managing the affair so as to keep at bay both Raoul and Clameran.</p>
			<p>She knew that <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel would be anxious to accept any terms of peace, but she determined to use all her influence to prevent her doing this, and to force upon her the necessity of preserving a dignified silence.</p>
			<p>This accounted for the silence of the two women, who were quietly waiting for their adversaries to renew hostilities.</p>
			<p>They even succeeded in concealing their anxiety beneath assumed indifference; never asking any questions about the robbery, or those in any way connected with it.</p>
			<p><abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel brought them an account of Prosper’s examination, the many charges brought against him, his obstinate denial of having stolen the money; and finally how, after great perplexity and close study of the case by the judge of instruction, the cashier had been discharged for want of sufficient proof against him.</p>
			<p>Since Clameran’s offer to restore the notes, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel had not doubted Prosper’s guilt. She said nothing, but inwardly accused him of having seduced her son from the path of virtue, and enticed him into crime⁠—her son whom she would never cease to love, no matter how great his faults.</p>
			<p>Madeleine had perfect faith in Prosper’s innocence.</p>
			<p>She was so confident of his being restored to liberty that she ventured to ask her uncle, under pretext of some charitable object, to give her ten thousand francs, which she sent to the unfortunate victim of circumstantial evidence; who, from what she had heard of his poverty, must be in need of assistance.</p>
			<p>In the letter⁠—cut from her prayerbook to avoid detection by writing⁠—accompanying the money, she advised Prosper to leave France, because she knew that it would be impossible for a man of his proud nature to remain on the scene of his disgrace; the greater his innocence, the more intolerable his suffering.</p>
			<p>Besides, Madeleine, at that time feeling that she would be obliged to marry Clameran, was anxious to have the man she loved far, far away from her.</p>
			<p>On the day that this anonymous present was sent, in opposition to the wishes of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel, the two poor women were entangled fearfully in pecuniary difficulties.</p>
			<p>The tradesmen whose money had been squandered by Raoul refused to give credit any longer, and insisted upon their bills being paid at once; saying they could not understand how a man of <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel’s wealth and position could keep them waiting for such insignificant sums.</p>
			<p>The butcher, grocer, and wine-merchant had bills of one, two, and five hundred francs only; but, not having even that small amount, <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel had difficulty in prevailing upon them to receive a part on account, and wait a little longer for the residue.</p>
			<p>Some of the storekeepers threatened to ask the banker for their money, if everything was not settled before the end of the week.</p>
			<p>Alas! <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel’s indebtedness amounted to fifteen thousand francs.</p>
			<p>Madeleine and her aunt had declined all invitations during the winter, to avoid purchasing evening dresses; having always been remarkable for their superb toilets, seldom appearing in the same ball-dress twice, they dared not give rise to comment by wearing their old dresses, and knowing that <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel would be the first to ask the cause of this sudden change, as he liked to see them always the best-dressed women in the room.</p>
			<p>But at last they were obliged to appear in public. <abbr>M.</abbr> Fauvel’s most intimate friends, the <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Jandidier, were about to give a splendid ball, and, as fate would have it, a fancy ball, which would require the purchasing of costumes.</p>
			<p>Where would the money come from?</p>
			<p>They had been owing a large bill to their dressmaker for over a year. Would she consent to furnish them dresses on credit? They were ashamed to ask her.</p>
			<p>Madeleine’s new maid, Palmyre Chocareille, extricated them from this difficulty.</p>
			<p>This girl, who seemed to have suffered all the minor ills of life⁠—which, after all, are the hardest to bear⁠—seemed to have divined her mistress’s anxiety.</p>
			<p>At any rate, she voluntarily informed Madeleine that a friend of hers, a first-class dressmaker, had just set up for herself, and would be glad to furnish materials and make the dresses on credit, for the sake of obtaining the patronage of <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel and her niece, which would at once bring her plenty of fashionable customers.</p>
			<p>But, after this dilemma was settled, a still greater one presented itself.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel and her niece could not appear at a ball without jewelry; and every jewel they owned had been taken by Raoul, and pawned.</p>
			<p>After thinking the matter over, Madeleine decided to ask Raoul to take some of the stolen money, and redeem the last set of jewels he had forced from his mother. She informed her aunt of her intention, and said, in a tone that admitted of no contradiction:</p>
			<p>“Appoint an interview with Raoul: he will not dare to refuse you; and I will go in your stead.”</p>
			<p>The next day, the courageous girl took a cab, and, regardless of the inclement weather, went to Vésinet.</p>
			<p>She would have been filled with consternation had she known that <abbr>M.</abbr> Verduret and Prosper were following close behind, and witnessed her interview from the top of a ladder.</p>
			<p>Her bold step was fruitless. Raoul swore that he had divided with Prosper; that his own half of the money was spent, and that he had not a napoleon wherewith to redeem anything.</p>
			<p>He even refused to give up the pledges; and Madeleine had to resort to threats of exposure, before she could induce him to surrender the tickets of four or five trifling articles that were indispensable to their toilet.</p>
			<p>Clameran had ordered him to refuse positively to give up a single ticket, because he hoped that in their distress they would call upon him for relief.</p>
			<p>The violent altercation witnessed by Clameran’s new valet, Joseph Dubois, had been caused by the exaction of this promise.</p>
			<p>The accomplices were at that time on very bad terms. Clameran was seeking a safe means of getting rid of Raoul; and the young scamp, having a presentiment of his uncle’s intentions, was determined to outwit him.</p>
			<p>Nothing but the certainty of impending danger could reconcile them. The danger was revealed to them both at the Jandidier ball.</p>
			<p>Who was the mysterious mountebank that indulged in such transparent allusions to <abbr>Mme.</abbr> Fauvel’s private troubles, and then said, with threatening significance to Louis: “I was the best friend of your brother Gaston?”</p>
			<p>Who he was, where he came from, they could not imagine; but they clearly saw that he was a dangerous enemy, and forthwith attempted to assassinate him upon his leaving the ball.</p>
			<p>Having been followed and watched by their would-be victim, they became alarmed⁠—especially when he suddenly disappeared⁠—and wisely decided that the safest thing they then could do was to return quietly to their hotel.</p>
			<p>“We cannot be too guarded in our conduct,” whispered Clameran; “we must discover who he is before taking any further steps in this matter.”</p>
			<p>Once more, Raoul tried to induce him to give up his project of marrying Madeleine.</p>
			<p>“Never!” he exclaimed fiercely, “I will marry her or perish in the attempt!”</p>
			<p>He thought that, now they were warned, the danger of being caught was lessened; when on his guard, few people could entrap so experienced and skilful a rogue.</p>
			<p>Little did Clameran know that a man who was a hundredfold more skilful than he was closely pursuing him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
